README.md, before:

# Sqlite Plugin

The **Sqlite** Plugin is for [Grav CMS](http://github.com/getgrav/grav). The shortcode `[sql-table]` and the ***Form*** actions `sql-insert` and `sql-update`  are provided to interact with an ***Sqlite3*** database.

## Installation

Installing the Sqlite plugin can be done in one of two ways. The GPM (Grav Package Manager) installation method enables you to quickly and easily install the plugin with a simple terminal command, while the manual method enables you to do so via a zip file.

### GPM Installation (Preferred)

The simplest way to install this plugin is via the [Grav Package Manager (GPM)](http://learn.getgrav.org/advanced/grav-gpm) through your system's terminal (also called the command line).  From the root of your Grav install type:

    bin/gpm install sqlite

This will install the Sqlite plugin into your `/user/plugins` directory within Grav. Its files can be found under `/your/site/grav/user/plugins/sqlite`.

### Manual Installation

To install this plugin, just download the zip version of this repository and unzip it under `/your/site/grav/user/plugins`. Then, rename the folder to `sqlite`. You can find these files on [GitHub](https://github.com/finanalyst/grav-plugin-sqlite) or via [GetGrav.org](http://getgrav.org/downloads/plugins#extras).

You should now have all the plugin files under

    /your/site/grav/user/plugins/sqlite

> NOTE: This plugin is a modular component for Grav which requires [Grav](http://github.com/getgrav/grav) and the [Error](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-error),
[Form](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-form), [ShortcodeCore](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-shortcode-core)
and [Problems](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-problems) to operate.  
The plugin also requires that the **SQLite3** extension is available with the version of php operating on your site.  


## Configuration

Before configuring this plugin, you should copy the `user/plugins/sqlite/sqlite.yaml` to `user/config/plugins/sqlite.yaml` and only edit that copy.

Here is the default configuration and an explanation of available options:

```yaml
enabled: true
database_route: data
database_name: db.sqlite3
```
- `enabled` turns on the plugin for the whole site. If `false`, then making it active on a page will have no effect.  
- `database_route` is the Grav route (relative to the 'user' subdirectory) to the location of the `SQLite3` database.  
- `database_name` is the full name (typically with the extension .sqlite3) of the database file. It is the responsibility of the site developer/maintainer to create the database.

>NOTE: The database must exist.

### Per page configuration
Shortcodes can be enabled separately using the `shortcode-core` configuration. To disable shortcodes being used on all pages, but only used on selected pages, configure the shortcode-core plugin inside the Admin panel with `enabled=true` and `active=false`. Then on each page where shortcodes are used, include in the front section of the page:
```yaml
shortcode-core:
  active: true
```

## Usage
A shortcode and a Form action are provided.
1. `[sql-table]` to generate a table from data in the database
2. the `sql-insert` action for a ***Form*** is used to move data from a form to the database.
1. the `sql-update` action for a ***Form*** is used to update an existing row of data in the database.

When the plugin is first initialised, it verifies that the database exists. If it does not exist, then every instance of the `[sql-table]` shortcode is replaced with an error message and the Form generates an error message when the submit button is pressed.

### [sql-table] Shortcode

In the page content the shortcode is used as:
```md
[sql-table]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```

The plugin then generates an html table with the headers as returned by the select stanza, and the body containing the row data.

The SELECT stanza can be complex referring to multiple tables in the database. An SQLite3 query will return a table of rows with the same number of elements, which will fit into a simple HTML table.

Since the data would normally be updated, it is recommended that the page header contains:
```yaml
cache-enabled: false
```

The `[sql-table]...[/sql-table]` stanza can be embedded in other shortcodes, such as  [ScrolledTableShortcode](https://github.com/finanalyst/grav-scrolled-table-shortcode) plugin, or configured with the [Tablesorter](https://github.com/Perlkonig/grav-plugin-tablesorter) plugin.

#### Example
Assuming that:
- The default plugin configuration is not changed
- The file `<path to Grav>/user/data/db.sqlite3` exists
- The database has a table `people`, which in turn has the fields
  - `name`
  - `surname`
  - `telephone`
  - `gender`  

Then the following code and sql stanza (standard SQLite3 allows new lines and indentation for clarity)
```md
[sql-table]
SELECT name, surname, telephone, gender
  FROM people
  LIMIT 4
[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered something like
```html
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>name</th><th>surname</th><th>telephone</th><th>gender</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz1</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz2</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz3</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
```
#### Options
The following options are allowed:
- class
- id
- hidden

##### class
 Provided so that a css class can be added to the table. Thus
```md
[sql-table class=SomeName]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered as
```html
<table class="SomeName">
  ...
</table>
```
##### id
 Provided so that an `id` can be added to the table. Thus
```md
[sql-table id=SomeId]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered as
```html
<table id="SomeId">
  ...
</table>
```
##### hidden
If a list of column names is provided, then the column will not be displayed. The column names must be the same as the column names returned by the SQL stanza, eg.,
```md
[sql-table hidden="id idnum"]SELECT row-id as id, Passport as idnum, name, surname, telephone from people
[/sql-table]
```
>Notes:
1. Column names are matched using `\s+` or whitespace.   
This means that the column heads must be a single word (including `_`). This can be done by using `AS` to rename column names in the `SELECT` statement. Since the column headers are to be hidden, it does not matter what they look like.  
2. Shortcode parameters must be in double quotes `"..."` not single quotes `'...'`.

Column hiding is accomplished  by adding a `style="display: none;"` to the relevant `<th>` and `<td>` elements. Consequently, the data still exists in the HTML table, and so can be scrubbed or viewed by looking at the page source.

However, the intent of this option is to make the data available for use by JS or Jquery functions, or for updating the SQL database, but for it not to be immediately visible. For example, in order to update a row (a feature to be added), a row-id will be needed, but usually it is irrelevant for the user to see the row-id.

### Form Action `sql-insert`
A GRAV form is created within the page as described by the GRAV documentation. However, the `process` list contains the word `sql-insert`.

#### Example
In the page header, assuming the page is form.md
```yaml
form:
    name: Input data
    method: POST
    fields:
      - name: name  # the value here must be the same as a field in the database
        label: Name of person
        type: text
      - name: surname
        label: Surname of the person
        type: text
      - name: telephone
        type: text
        label: Telephone number of the person
      - name: gender
        type: select
        label: Person's gender
        options:
          male: male
          female: female
      process:
        - sql-insert: # this is the crucial one
            table: people # this must match the table the data is being added to
        - redirect: showdata # this is optional (see note below)
      buttons:
        - type: submit
          value: Add person to database
        - type: reset
          value: Reset
      reset: true # this is advised to prevent the same data being added multiple times.
```
When the submit button is pressed, the following stanza is sent to the database:
```sql
INSERT INTO people (name, surname, telephone, gender) VALUES (...)
```

The form plugin offers considerable flexibility for validating data before being sent to the database.

>NOTE1: No further validation of the data is carried out by the plugin.

In the example above, the process list has a redirect to another slug. This is optional. However, if the data is added correctly, it can be viewed using an `[sql-table]` shortcode with an appropriate `SELECT` stanza. The redirect action replaces the Form so that if, as recommended, the `reset` option is set to `true`, returning to the Form will set to default the fields, thus preventing inadvertent data duplication.

If there is an error (non-unique data, or incorrect fields), the `redirect` action is short-circuited.

### Form Action `sql-update`
A GRAV form is created within the page as described by the GRAV documentation. However, the `process` list contains the word `sql-update`.

#### Example
In the page header, assuming the page is form.md
```yaml
form:
    name: Input data
    method: POST
    fields:
      - name: telephone
        type: text
        label: Telephone number of the person
      - name: status
        type: select
        label: Club membership
        options:
          ordinary: Ordinary
          VIP: VIP
          Senior: Senior
      process:
        - sql-update: # this is the crucial one
            table: people # this must match the table the data is being added to
            where: ' row-id = "3" ' # a mandatory option. It is the full WHERE expression
        - redirect: showdata # this is optional
      buttons:
        - type: submit
          value: Update person to database
        - type: reset
          value: Reset
      reset: true # this is advised to prevent the same data being added multiple times.
```
When the submit button is pressed, the following stanza is sent to the database:
```sql
UPDATE people
  SET telephone = <telephone> ,
          status = <status>
  WHERE row-id = "3"
```
Here <...> is the value given in the ***Form*** for the relevant field.

It is for the website designer to figure out how to construct the `where` option for the form.

## Security
Security is an issue because a `sql-insert` and `sql-update` form actions allows a
page user to modify an existing database, and therefore corrupt it - at the very least by adding unnecessary data.

The website designer should therefore make sure that Forms with `sql-insert` and `sql-update` actions are only available on Grav pages that are protected.

For example, using the `Login` plugin, only users with certain privileges or belonging to certain groups can be allowed in.

Alternatively, using the `Private` plugin, a password can be created for the page.

## To Do
- Internationalise. Add more languages to `langages.yaml`
- Create a `confirm` option for the Form interface so that data is confirmed before being sent to the database.

Commit message:

bumb version, add where field

README.md, after:

# Sqlite Plugin

The **Sqlite** Plugin is for [Grav CMS](http://github.com/getgrav/grav). The shortcode `[sql-table]` and the ***Form*** actions `sql-insert` and `sql-update`  are provided to interact with an ***Sqlite3*** database.

## Installation

Installing the Sqlite plugin can be done in one of two ways. The GPM (Grav Package Manager) installation method enables you to quickly and easily install the plugin with a simple terminal command, while the manual method enables you to do so via a zip file.

### GPM Installation (Preferred)

The simplest way to install this plugin is via the [Grav Package Manager (GPM)](http://learn.getgrav.org/advanced/grav-gpm) through your system's terminal (also called the command line).  From the root of your Grav install type:

    bin/gpm install sqlite

This will install the Sqlite plugin into your `/user/plugins` directory within Grav. Its files can be found under `/your/site/grav/user/plugins/sqlite`.

### Manual Installation

To install this plugin, just download the zip version of this repository and unzip it under `/your/site/grav/user/plugins`. Then, rename the folder to `sqlite`. You can find these files on [GitHub](https://github.com/finanalyst/grav-plugin-sqlite) or via [GetGrav.org](http://getgrav.org/downloads/plugins#extras).

You should now have all the plugin files under

    /your/site/grav/user/plugins/sqlite

> NOTE: This plugin is a modular component for Grav which requires [Grav](http://github.com/getgrav/grav) and the [Error](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-error),
[Form](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-form), [ShortcodeCore](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-shortcode-core)
and [Problems](https://github.com/getgrav/grav-plugin-problems) to operate.  
The plugin also requires that the **SQLite3** extension is available with the version of php operating on your site.  


## Configuration

Before configuring this plugin, you should copy the `user/plugins/sqlite/sqlite.yaml` to `user/config/plugins/sqlite.yaml` and only edit that copy.

Here is the default configuration and an explanation of available options:

```yaml
enabled: true
database_route: data
database_name: db.sqlite3
```
- `enabled` turns on the plugin for the whole site. If `false`, then making it active on a page will have no effect.  
- `database_route` is the Grav route (relative to the 'user' subdirectory) to the location of the `SQLite3` database.  
- `database_name` is the full name (typically with the extension .sqlite3) of the database file. It is the responsibility of the site developer/maintainer to create the database.

>NOTE: The database must exist.

### Per page configuration
Shortcodes can be enabled separately using the `shortcode-core` configuration. To disable shortcodes being used on all pages, but only used on selected pages, configure the shortcode-core plugin inside the Admin panel with `enabled=true` and `active=false`. Then on each page where shortcodes are used, include in the front section of the page:
```yaml
shortcode-core:
  active: true
```

## Usage
A shortcode and a Form action are provided.
1. `[sql-table]` to generate a table from data in the database
2. the `sql-insert` action for a ***Form*** is used to move data from a form to the database.
1. the `sql-update` action for a ***Form*** is used to update an existing row of data in the database.

When the plugin is first initialised, it verifies that the database exists. If it does not exist, then every instance of the `[sql-table]` shortcode is replaced with an error message and the Form generates an error message when the submit button is pressed.

### [sql-table] Shortcode

In the page content the shortcode is used as:
```md
[sql-table]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```

The plugin then generates an html table with the headers as returned by the select stanza, and the body containing the row data.

The SELECT stanza can be complex referring to multiple tables in the database. An SQLite3 query will return a table of rows with the same number of elements, which will fit into a simple HTML table.

Since the data would normally be updated, it is recommended that the page header contains:
```yaml
cache-enabled: false
```

The `[sql-table]...[/sql-table]` stanza can be embedded in other shortcodes, such as  [ScrolledTableShortcode](https://github.com/finanalyst/grav-scrolled-table-shortcode) plugin, or configured with the [Tablesorter](https://github.com/Perlkonig/grav-plugin-tablesorter) plugin.

#### Example
Assuming that:
- The default plugin configuration is not changed
- The file `<path to Grav>/user/data/db.sqlite3` exists
- The database has a table `people`, which in turn has the fields
  - `name`
  - `surname`
  - `telephone`
  - `gender`  

Then the following code and sql stanza (standard SQLite3 allows new lines and indentation for clarity)
```md
[sql-table]
SELECT name, surname, telephone, gender
  FROM people
  LIMIT 4
[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered something like
```html
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>name</th><th>surname</th><th>telephone</th><th>gender</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz1</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz2</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>xyz3</td><td>qwe</td><td>1234</td><td>Male</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
```
#### Options
The following options are allowed:
- class
- id
- hidden

##### class
 Provided so that a css class can be added to the table. Thus
```md
[sql-table class=SomeName]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered as
```html
<table class="SomeName">
  ...
</table>
```
##### id
 Provided so that an `id` can be added to the table. Thus
```md
[sql-table id=SomeId]SELECT stanza[/sql-table]
```
will be rendered as
```html
<table id="SomeId">
  ...
</table>
```
##### hidden
If a list of column names is provided, then the column will not be displayed. The column names must be the same as the column names returned by the SQL stanza, eg.,
```md
[sql-table hidden="id idnum"]SELECT row-id as id, Passport as idnum, name, surname, telephone from people
[/sql-table]
```
>Notes:
1. Column names are matched using `\s+` or whitespace.   
This means that the column heads must be a single word (including `_`). This can be done by using `AS` to rename column names in the `SELECT` statement. Since the column headers are to be hidden, it does not matter what they look like.  
2. Shortcode parameters must be in double quotes `"..."` not single quotes `'...'`.

Column hiding is accomplished  by adding a `style="display: none;"` to the relevant `<th>` and `<td>` elements. Consequently, the data still exists in the HTML table, and so can be scrubbed or viewed by looking at the page source.

However, the intent of this option is to make the data available for use by JS or Jquery functions, or for updating the SQL database, but for it not to be immediately visible. For example, in order to update a row (a feature to be added), a row-id will be needed, but usually it is irrelevant for the user to see the row-id.

### Form Action `sql-insert`
A GRAV form is created within the page as described by the GRAV documentation. However, the `process` list contains the word `sql-insert`.

#### Example
In the page header, assuming the page is form.md
```yaml
form:
    name: Input data
    method: POST
    fields:
      - name: name  # the value here must be the same as a field in the database
        label: Name of person
        type: text
      - name: surname
        label: Surname of the person
        type: text
      - name: telephone
        type: text
        label: Telephone number of the person
      - name: gender
        type: select
        label: Person's gender
        options:
          male: male
          female: female
      process:
        - sql-insert: # this is the crucial one
            table: people # this must match the table the data is being added to
        - redirect: showdata # this is optional (see note below)
      buttons:
        - type: submit
          value: Add person to database
        - type: reset
          value: Reset
      reset: true # this is advised to prevent the same data being added multiple times.
```
When the submit button is pressed, the following stanza is sent to the database:
```sql
INSERT INTO people (name, surname, telephone, gender) VALUES (...)
```

The form plugin offers considerable flexibility for validating data before being sent to the database.

>NOTE1: No further validation of the data is carried out by the plugin.

In the example above, the process list has a redirect to another slug. This is optional. However, if the data is added correctly, it can be viewed using an `[sql-table]` shortcode with an appropriate `SELECT` stanza. The redirect action replaces the Form so that if, as recommended, the `reset` option is set to `true`, returning to the Form will set to default the fields, thus preventing inadvertent data duplication.

If there is an error (non-unique data, or incorrect fields), the `redirect` action is short-circuited.

### Form Action `sql-update`
A GRAV form is created within the page as described by the GRAV documentation. However, the `process` list contains the word `sql-update`.

#### Example
In the page header, assuming the page is form.md
```yaml
form:
    name: Input data
    method: POST
    fields:
      - name: telephone
        type: text
        label: Telephone number of the person
      - name: status
        type: select
        label: Club membership
        options:
          ordinary: Ordinary
          VIP: VIP
          Senior: Senior
      - name: where # a mandatory option (note lower case only). It is the full WHERE expression
        type: hidden # this is a where FIELD
        content: ' row-id = "3" ' # the single quotes are needed to ensure the double quotes are included
      process:
        - sql-update: # this is the crucial one
            table: people # this must match the table the data is being added to
            where: ' row-id = "3" ' # a mandatory option. This is a process PARAMETER
            # a where field takes precedence over a where parameter
        - redirect: showdata # this is optional
      buttons:
        - type: submit
          value: Update person to database
        - type: reset
          value: Reset
      reset: true # this is advised to prevent the same data being added multiple times.
```
When the submit button is pressed, the following stanza is sent to the database:
```sql
UPDATE people
  SET telephone = <telephone> ,
          status = <status>
  WHERE row-id = "3"
```
Here <...> is the value given in the ***Form*** for the relevant field.

It is for the website designer to figure out how to construct the `where` option (either by field or parameter) for the form.

## Security
Security is an issue because a `sql-insert` and `sql-update` form actions allows a
page user to modify an existing database, and therefore corrupt it - at the very least by adding unnecessary data.

The website designer should therefore make sure that Forms with `sql-insert` and `sql-update` actions are only available on Grav pages that are protected.

For example, using the `Login` plugin, only users with certain privileges or belonging to certain groups can be allowed in.

Alternatively, using the `Private` plugin, a password can be created for the page.

## To Do
- Internationalise. Add more languages to `langages.yaml`
- Create a `confirm` option for the Form interface so that data is confirmed before being sent to the database.
